Annotated Bibliography
Hillary Predko
2335834

Alfoldy, Sandra. NeoCraft: Modernity and the Crafts. Halifax, N.S.: Press of the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, 2007. Print.

      Sandra Alfoldy has put together a volume that interrogates very contemporary concerns in craft practice. With a section on digital technology and craft, this book will be the most useful piece of craft theory as I begin my thesis research. Conversations about digital technology as a tool are mixed in with work of makers who use rapid prototyping in their work. Despite some reservations, Alfoldy says, “There is no doubt that the future belongs to the virtual spaces of craft (215).” I really enjoyed Love Jonsson’s essay Rethinking Dichotomies: Craft and Digital Technology (240) where a more dialectic approach is encouraged. The wide use of the internet to communicate about work and exhibitions is cited as a way that has changed the craft world (246). Craft practitioners can bring more warmth to technology, instead of technology making craft cold. Craft is being applied often as a methodology to other field rather than cozy objects (251).
Bonanni, Leonardo, Amanda Parkes, and Hiroshi Ishii. “Future Craft: How Digital Media is Transforming Product Design.” MIT Media Lab, n.d. Web. 20 Sept. 2012. <http://tmg-trackr.media.mit.edu:8020/SuperContainer/RawData/Papers/362-Future%20Craft%20How%20Digital/Published/PDF>.

The first two sentences of the abstract for this paper explain what I want to do more effectively than I can myself, “The open and collective traditions of the interaction community have created new opportunities for product designers to engage in the social issues around industrial production. This paper introduces Future Craft, a design methodology which applies emerging digital tools and processes to product design toward new objects that are socially and environmentally sustainable.” There are really exciting things happening out there, and I want to be able to make work that is relevant to this methodology. This paper is intended for a course at MIT, so there are even assignments and further reading included (3). “Instead of mass-producing generic objects to somewhat satisfy a lot of people, internet distribution enables designers to target custom-designed products to communities and individuals (4)” I would really like the include this entire essay here, but I realize that isn’t the point. It is exciting to see that what I would like to pursue can be done and has been done.

Carson, Kevin A. The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low-overhead Manifesto. [S.l.]: urge, 2010. Print.

“innovation in the technologies of small?scale production and of daily living reduce the worker’s need for a continuing income stream. It enables the microenterprise to function intermittently and to enter the market incrementally, with no overhead to be serviced when business is slow. The result is enterprises that are lean and agile, and can survive long periods of slow business, at virtually no cost; likewise, such increased efficiencies, by minimizing the ongoing income stream required for comfortable subsistence, have the same liberating effect on ordinary people that access to land on the common did for their ancestors three hundred years ago.(2)” This book is amazing Marxist materialist look at the way technology can create decentralized networks of production (174).From a theoretical standpoint I find this book saying things that I intuitively believed albeit in a strong academic voice with myriad references for support. It’s very dense but I think it will be an incredibly valuable resource and its available as a free ebook.
Doctorow, Cory. Makers. New York: Tor, 2010. Print.
      Cory Doctorow’s Makers is a fictional synthesis of projects that utilize open source ideologies to create new business practices (20). The novel also functions as a thought experiment in new decentralized economics. While the methodologies ultimately fail in the narrative, “New Work” (43), a maker based economy functioning as a 21st century New Deal is a great lens to look at the future. My favourite part is when owning a private jet after New Work is compared to building a cathedral after the Protestant reformation (67). Doctorow is a blogger on Boing Boing, a cyberpunk site gone mainstream, and a copyright activist extraordinaire. This book is interesting for its content and its methodologies; it is released on a creative commons license meaning it is free online for personal use.
      
Doctorow, Cory, and Tim O’Reilly. Context. San Francisco, CA: Tachyon Publications, 2011. Print.

This book is a collection of a couple dozen short essays by author and activist Cory Doctorow. Some deal with being a writer, his personal life and other topics that aren’t really going to further my thesis. However, his addition to the discourse around art and copyright is invaluable. In his essay Love the Machine, Hate the Factory, he talks about the ways in which technological innovation can be extradited from corporate rule. “We’ll be able to work like an artisan and produce like an assembly line (230).” The essay Think Like a Dandelion is also incredibly relevant, arguing that in the age of zero-marginal-cost copying, artists do best to disseminate their work freely and widely, like the thousands of seeds dandelions spread into the wind (77). While most of the theorizing does pertain specifically to authors and the written word, copyright and creative works is a concept that applies across mediums.
      
Funderburgh, Dan. "DAN FUNDERBURGH." Dan Funderburgh. Web. 15 Mar. 2012. <http://www.danfunderburgh.com/>.

      Dan Funderburgh has created the most impressive contemporary decorative arts that I have come across. Everything from bicycles to bongs manages to be entangled in vines and turned into beautiful pieces referencing Arts and Crafts patternmaking. I am particularly interested in his Tool Wall piece for its laser etched delicate patterns on objects revered for use rather than beauty. His website has a good gallery, which is inspiring in the variation of work he produces. If I could achieve such a successful update on traditional decorative arts with such a skillful balance of positive and negative space, I would be very happy indeed.
Gershenfeld, Neil A. Fab: The Coming Revolution on Your Desktop--from Personal Computers to Personal Fabrication. New York: Basic, 2007. Print.

      Neil Gershenfeld is a scientist from MIT on the forefront of personal fabrication. He heads MIT’s Centre for Bits and Atoms, which aims to combine the worlds of physical science with computer science. This book exists at the edge of my knowledge a lot of the time, because it comes at fabrication technology from a computer science angle (18). He has created “Fab Labs” all over the world with laser cutters, 3D printers, and other technologies. In developed countries these are used for more whimsical art and design, but in developing or isolated communities people create objects to test if milk is sour, track sheep and many more useful applications (80). He believes personal fabricators are on the edge of a revolution akin to desktop computer in the last decades (4). In teaching a class at MIT called “How to Make (Almost) Anything” he came to the conclusion, “Individual needs are unlikely to be met by products aimed at mass markets. A truly personal computing device is by definition not mass-produced, or even mass-customized; it is personally designed. (21)”
      
Glitschka, Von. Vector Basic Training: A Systematic Creative Process for Building Precision Vector Artwork. Berkeley, CA: New Riders, 2011. Print.

      Basic Vector Training provides a solid framework for continuing to learn Adobe Illustrator. With a focus on sketching, iterating and finishing a drawing before the artwork is even scanned (49), this book really pushes vectors as a tool for perfecting drawings. While I still have a lot to learn in Illustrator, a lot of the basic functions feel demystified such as bezier curves (5). Von introduces what he calls his “clock work method” as a way of placing anchor points to produce pleasing lines (89). This is a very basic introduction, but that’s exactly what I need.
Hyde, Lewis. The Gift: How the Creative Spirit Transforms the World. Edinburgh: Canongate, 2006. Print.

Commodity and creativity seem to be at odds in my mind, and Hyde reinforces the fact that they don’t necessarily fit together. Unless, of course, there is a gift aspect. He argues art as pure commodity is not possible, there must be an aspect of a gift. Since I am going to be embarking on work that is available freely, I have many lessons to learn from this book. Forming bonds and community through gift giving is central to my work, and Hyde highlights that these bonds run deep. They are social as well as spiritual and psychological (57). And for my own peace of mind, I am reassured by Hyde’s assertion that when giving a gift, it is always returned (9). 
      
Kadushin, Ronen. "Kadushin." Kadushin. Web. 23 Sept 2012. <http://www.ronen-kadushin.com/>.

Aesthetically, Ronan’s work does little for me, but I am interested in his open design philosophy. He works with the open source software model and applies it to objects. “In Open Design a design is CAD information published online under a Creative Commons license to be downloaded, copied and modified, and is produced directly from file by CNC machines and without special tooling.“ The fact he is against additional tooling is not something I would want to carry over to my work, but it’s encouraging to see others working in this way.  He says, “a new product and services market is a natural outcome of a network of designers, manufacturers, consumers and retailers using a common pool of open designs.” 

McCullough, Malcolm. Abstracting Craft: The Practiced Digital Hand. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1996. Print.

      Published in 1996, this book seems to be the first academic foray into digital media and craft practice. It is extremely dense, defining tools, tool use and tool systems before entering into an argument for digital tools. “In the case of craft, interpretations focus specifically on the way in which content takes form.” The arguments are largely intellectual and philosophical, and could serve as a strong theoretical justification for the work I intend to embark on. I think the most important assertion is the fact that digitally produced crafts still engage with a dense medium which must be mastered. This book is not available at any library in Canada though, I accessed a truncated PDF (http://icos.groups.si.umich.edu/McCulloughChap7copy.pdf). I am going to need to look into interlibrary loans.
Mellis, David A. "Case Studies in the Digital Fabrication of Open-Source Consumer Electronic Products." Thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011. Web. <http://web.media.mit.edu/~mellis/mellis-thesis-screen.pdf>.

      Mellis’ thesis paper from MIT’s High Low Tech lab may be the most important thing I have come across in my research. Mellis tries to rethink how we use and make objects with case studies around shared production of three consumer electronics. He is talking about the same digital circumvention of industrialization that I want to interrogate. “Both craft and digital fabrication blur [the distinction between design and production] by allowing for the gradual evolution of a design through the work of many people (15).” He focuses on the open source software model and applies it to physical objects. He concludes his thesis with “fabrication and open-source hardware provide some of the most promising possibilities for expanding the products and processes that constitute our increasingly technological environment (66).” 
      
Racinet, Auguste, M. Dupont-Auberville, and Juliane Steinbrecher. The World of Ornament. Hong Kong: Taschen, 2009. Print.

      Full of images from decorative arts traditions all over the world, this giant Taschen book is a fantastic reference for surface design inspiration. Every plate is documented by date, culture and includes a description of its implementation. Every image could be inspiration for a contemporary surface design pattern, there is truly a fount of material. Whenever I am feeling uninspired, or stuck on a formal consideration I flip through the pages and without fail I will have resolved my problem within a few hundred.

Swoon. Swoon. New York: Abrams, 2010. Print.

      For the past few years this book has been a fount of inspiration for me. Callie Curry is an artist who makes more than a pretty picture with work that is political, social and community based. The essays in this book provide a strong basis for understanding the myriad practices she has employed in the past decade. Both personal and academic, there are plenty of ideological places to jump off from (12). The work itself, everything from street art (13) to installation (78) to shipbuilding (160), shows a consistent commitment to draftsmanship and the use of decorative patterns. This work has been hugely inspirational to me, and I always keep Swoon in mind when creating.
      
Thomas, Dana. Deluxe: How Luxury Lost Its Luster. New York: Penguin, 2008. Print.

      The world of luxury brands has a hold on the public consciousness, and Deluxe attempts to break down the fetishization of these products by exposing their poor construction and lack of corporate integrity. With statistics illuminating the massive profits that are being generated, Thomas exposes how one trendy product can result in hundreds of millions in profit (4). She traces the history from crafts tradition to multinational brands aiming to make as much money as humanly possible (9). In some ways, I see the bags I want to make as anti-“it-bags” so the chapter on purses (167) is particularly valuable. Lifestyle marketing and globalization are issues that make fashion a scary world indeed, and this book highlights that.

